What's New in Python 2.0
************************

Author:
   A.M. Kuchling and Moshe Zadka


Introduction
============

A new release of Python, version 2.0, was released on October 16,
2000. This article covers the exciting new features in 2.0, highlights
some other useful changes, and points out a few incompatible changes
that may require rewriting code.

Python's development never completely stops between releases, and a
steady flow of bug fixes and improvements are always being submitted.
A host of minor fixes, a few optimizations, additional docstrings, and
better error messages went into 2.0; to list them all would be
impossible, but they're certainly significant. Consult the publicly-
available CVS logs if you want to see the full list.  This progress is
due to the five developers working for  PythonLabs are now getting
paid to spend their days fixing bugs, and also due to the improved
communication resulting  from moving to SourceForge.


What About Python 1.6?
======================

Python 1.6 can be thought of as the Contractual Obligations Python
release. After the core development team left CNRI in May 2000, CNRI
requested that a 1.6 release be created, containing all the work on
Python that had been performed at CNRI.  Python 1.6 therefore
represents the state of the CVS tree as of May 2000, with the most
significant new feature being Unicode support.  Development continued
after May, of course, so the 1.6 tree received a few fixes to ensure
that it's forward-compatible with Python 2.0.  1.6 is therefore part
of Python's evolution, and not a side branch.

So, should you take much interest in Python 1.6?  Probably not.  The
1.6final and 2.0beta1 releases were made on the same day (September 5,
2000), the plan being to finalize Python 2.0 within a month or so.  If
you have applications to maintain, there seems little point in
breaking things by moving to 1.6, fixing them, and then having another
round of breakage within a month by moving to 2.0; you're better off
just going straight to 2.0.  Most of the really interesting features
described in this document are only in 2.0, because a lot of work was
done between May and September.


New Development Process
=======================* Three new keystroke commands: Check module ("Alt-F5"), Import module
  ("F5") and Run script ("Ctrl-F5").


Deleted and Deprecated Modules
==============================

A few modules have been dropped because they're obsolete, or because
there are now better ways to do the same thing.  The "stdwin" module
is gone; it was for a platform-independent windowing toolkit that's no
longer developed.

A number of modules have been moved to the "lib-old" subdirectory:
"cmp", "cmpcache", "dircmp", "dump",  "find", "grep", "packmail",
"poly", "util", "whatsound", "zmod".  If you have code which relies on
a module  that's been moved to "lib-old", you can simply add that
directory to "sys.path"   to get them back, but you're encouraged to
update any code that uses these modules.


Acknowledgements
================

The authors would like to thank the following people for offering
suggestions on various drafts of this article: David Bolen, Mark
Hammond, Gregg Hauser, Jeremy Hylton, Fredrik Lundh, Detlef Lannert,
Aahz Maruch, Skip Montanaro, Vladimir Marangozov, Tobias Polzin, Guido
van Rossum, Neil Schemenauer, and Russ Schmidt.
